OSIRIS-REx Derived Radio Science Data Collection Overview


The following files are included in this collection:

overview.txt - This file, describing the files in the collection. All files with the exception of the pseudo range product are derived from:
Chesley, S. R., French, A. S., Davis, A. B., Jacobson, R. A., Brozović, M., Farnocchia, D., et al. (2020). Trajectory estimation for particles observed in the vicinity of (101955) Bennu. Journal of Geophysical Research: Planets, 125, e2019JE006363.
https://doi.org/10.1029/2019JE006363

and 

Hergenrother, C. W., Maleszewski, C., Li, J.‐Y., Pajola, M., Chesley, S. R., French, A. S., et al. (2020). Photometry of particles ejected from active asteroid
(101955) Bennu. Journal of Geophysical Research: Planets, 125, e2020JE006381.
https://doi.org/10.1029/2020JE006381



obj.csv - Parameters of orbital fits. Note that some columns contain no data. If no data is present, these parameters were not calculated.

det.csv - Parameters of detections for all observations used in orbital fits. Note that some columns contain no data. If no data is present, these parameters were not calculated.

oblate.csv - Parameters of the particle shape fits. AMR is the area-to-mass ratio in m^2/kg and H is the absolute magnitude in mag, both from obj.csv. Here a and b are the semi-axes of an oblate ellipsoid of revolution in cm, as described in Hergenrother et al 2020. D_equiv is a volume equivalent spherical diameter in cm.

particles_pub_03Mar2020.bsp - An SPK file containing the trajectories of the objects detailed in obj.csv

grav_20_particles.m - A MATLAB script that provides the coefficients and covariance of the estimated gravity field. For more information about this gravity file, see note below

grav_shape_16x16.m - A MATLAB script that provides the coefficients of the shape-based uniform density gravity field. For more information about this gravity file, see note below

bounce.mp4 - Animation of particle bouncing off the Bennu surface.

orba.mp4 - Cosmographia animation of particles from Jan. 6 - Feb. 20 (during Orbit A)

orbc.mp4 - Cosmographia animation of particles from Aug. 9 - Sep. 23 (during Orbit C)

RSWG_bouguer_map_shape_Oct2021.fits - Bouguer anomaly map for Bennu's estimated gravity field (grav_20_particles.m). Red‐orange (green‐blue) regions indicate regionsof higher (lower) surface accelerations than those derived from the shape assuming uniform density

pseudo_range.txt - The "Bennu pseudo-ranging" data product consists of a table giving DSN range measurements of the OSIRIS-REx spacecraft as if the measurements were received and transmitted by Bennu. This product was produced by the OSIRIS-REx science team and 
was used to estimate the ephemeris of Bennu, Yarkovsky effect, and YORP effect.


GRAVITY FIELD FORMAT AND CONVENTIONS

The gravity field is represented as a spherical harmonic expansion to
degree and order 10 using fully normalized coefficients.  This
normalization is also commonly referred to as 4-pi normalized or Stokes
normalized, and corresponds to orthonormal basis functions over the
sphere.

Tesseral and sectoral terms are stored as fully normalized C(l,m) and
S(l,m) coefficients using this convention.

Zonal terms are stored separately as J2, J3, ..., J10 parameters, where
J(l) equals minus the unnormalized C(l,0) coefficient.  The corresponding
fully normalized zonal coefficient can be obtained by applying the same
normalization used for the C and S terms.

The parameter vector ordering is given explicitly by the NAMES array in
the Matlab file, and the covariance matrix corresponds to this same
ordering.

GM is given in km^3/s^2.  The reference radius of the body is 0.290 km.
Body-fixed frame orientation and spin parameters are provided in the file
header. Note that there is approximately a month between the creation dates 
of the two gravity files. Small differences in header frame values is due to 
updates in these values. The best available values were used in each calculation.



